[Music]
you can obviously hear me so it doesn't
make any difference you're all moving
but I'm frozen maybe there's a metaphor
there hello Danel thanks for
joining
well it's not quite 4:00 yet so maybe we
can wait a couple of minutes
definitely I was thrilled to say that it
was the tropical one that lead the chge
because there is a lot to say about the
what the atmospheric condition and how
to affect the the body
and the W set you cannot well indeed
that's a nice thought yeah
well I mean um even The Institute of
Petry where I supposedly have an
honorary
post uh no longer respond to my emails
because they don't really want a
conversation you they don't want a
conversation the papers that are
published which assume a you know a
universal mental health around the world
I.E a western one virtually never uh
reference any skeptical views of that
you know they're a functioning system
and they don't really want to know and
they certainly no want to argue with me
anymore I suppose I've mocked them a bit
too much but um one has to realize how
this system just plows
on but the um the other key players have
been I think the National Institute of
Mental Health in the US some of the big
Institute in the US and
Harvard Harvard had curiously enough
made a turn back to bi biology with even
with Arthur Kleinman and Byron good the
world world famous cultural psychiatrist
and medical Anthropologist
respectively they are def became
Defenders of global mental health and I
can't quite establish why not exactly
why except they seem to feel they're
doing something well are they doing what
the people on the ground want them to do
that may be another question
anyway danis we wait for a few minutes
if that's okay with you like only two
three that's all right I'll be back in a
minut
perfect can you hear
me I do
yeah and I can see as well okay so now I
switch off camera I
think if that's okay denus I will
introduce you very briefly and you you
you present yourself more completely I
would just save but not now later later
yeah later later
okay okay
okay later in five minutes if that's
okay
yeah welcome Lucy it's is that you from
The
Institute
what's iip
DW it's the Institute of psychiatric
drug
withdrawal
oh well that's another story yeah yeah
it's linked I I would say it's Kon
as I don't know I'm not expert as all of
you
is that fine that we wait for four
minutes yeah
sure is the are are you recording these
enri in in any language English Spanish
or
what I am I am recording it with all the
subtitles but the subtitles are going to
be I I I'm gonna have access and I'm
going to translate them as well oh
really yeah okay yeah that that's
something good about the Google meets
yeah
yeah well about 25 years ago I came to
Madrid and gave a lecture in
Spanish go God knows what it stood like
but I I used to work in Nicaragua uhuh
in uh during the war During the santaa
Revolution that was wow oh
wow how come you ended there I did there
well for the Nicaraguan Human Rights
Commission who was Handi organization I
worked for them but then later I went
back and did a study of War wounded men
on both sides both the San X Army and
the conas who had taken amnesty both of
them you know who were wounded
paraplegic by you know and did a study
of the two two groups of young men and
of course surprise surprise they were
all the same kind of young
men you know yeah this is a the big
Gringo it started this one as we
know that is the one that is invaded at
night uh where in Nicaragua yeah
who invaded at night they were I
mean at some point they were throw a
leader no or I I may be completely
mistaken I have no
idea I don't know about the reference
invaded at night I mean wait a second
I'm I'm looking for that oh
okay Ah that's other one that is the
banana War I'm I'm completely mistaken
no no forget about that okay wait in 81
they did again yeah
anyhow 81 the Sistas yeah yeah
the um
they I'm trying to think they took power
in
um 76 I
think of course Ortega is still there
he's back the president of Nic
Daniel it's that fine if we start in one
minute
is that Allison Pollock
there Allison yes yes yes I don't know
we've never met but I've obviously
admired your work from afar in trying to
save the
NHS doing a very good job no no no no no
no we could talk about yeah yeah hi
sorry I don't I can't see who's speaking
to me on the screen um well mine's
Frozen my name is Derek Summerfield Oh
Derek how wonderful lovely you're a
great friend and colleague of Neil my
great friend Neil yeah
lovely yeah uh that's really nice I'm
really looking forward to hearing your
talk in fact I've just been finishing a
paper with Lisa Cosgrove on depression
instruments and we've been citing your
work anyway really Lisa is also here oh
there's Lisa great there's
Lisa yeah depression is my bug dere
because I only got a notification from
Aaliyah very late this so I'm going to
be dipping in and out but really great
thank you I'm going to turn off my
camera now uh are you just just for just
for um just for S
yeah yeah nice to meet you hello
Lisa hello yes it's uh it's just such a
pleasure hi
danius hi hi
L thank you all for joining danus the
floor is yours actually maybe you can
all uh advise Derek maybe you can advise
we're trying to do known unknowns for
what's happening to Mental Health
Services in England or bmj webinar maybe
who's who's really good person to talk
to I'll try and email you afterwards
yeah yeah fine separately yeah do okay
thank you that's cool that's
cool if that's fine we give the mic to
danus
yes what's it hang on a moment yeah on I
next you are
next I mean it's it's four o'clock
European time isn't it that's it I don't
mind I don't mind does danius want to go
first then H wait Dani do you go now or
you prefer to do it the other way around
it's completely fine no it's up to you I
think that Derek
has yeah the the order had me first then
then that's that's I was mistaken direct
your
first let's go ahead yeah yeah that's my
my bad I didn't see it correctly that's
it okay I don't have any avad I'm just
going to talk to you but we seem a
fairly select
group the discussion of the title
political abuse of
Psychiatry uh obviously I'm most control
about things that are not necessarily
intended abuse or at least they're not
necessarily conspiratorial though they
come out that way the when people think
about political abuse of AI they think
immediately of um the Russian case which
I won't be discussing you know where
they invented a category called sluggish
schizophrenia uh whose Cardinal symptoms
were refusal to accept the Communist
system and for this they were intered
and given high doses of um antipsychotic
medication the only other example this
is by the way the only example I know of
of a of a national government creating a
psychiatric category was in fact the
blairite labor government in um Britain
this is just one more thing I have
against him who more or
less uh were responsible behind the
scene for the creation of a category
called something like dangerously severe
personality disorder uh a subcategory of
people who would get a particular kind
of treatment they created this condition
out of nowhere uh and it came and for a
while was centers and there was probably
a professor of dangerously severe and
then it all kind of melted away you know
the way things do in Psychiatry there
sort of waves aren't there one way or
another okay so it's not that sort of
abuse but what I want to start with is
the relationship between neoliberal
philosophy um on the one hand and uh the
medicalization of everyday life and
through that then
to the effect the effec of abuses as it
happens of non-western peoples around
the world by the insistence by the
psychiatric establishment that their
systems of classification and modes of
reasoning should apply to everyone in
the world no matter what their
background their views of why they on
Earth and all of that so I'll come to
that I mean soob is a wonderful example
where I just got back from but um just
to start with what do we mean by
neoliberalism we mean a political
philosophy that's got an astonishing
hold to me it's it you know it's
anti-humanistic philosophy which is
broadly speaking that what one is
interested in is the is the individual
with resources to
disperse uh and what if he has resources
to disperse he's what the focus would be
he's praised however Rich he is he's
considered to to Merit all of that and
the flip side being that the poor and
others who don't have resources to
disperse and who need things are to be
considered uh to be be fallible and
really not worth it and in a sense Neal
philosophy more or less says to the
political order we don't need Politics
the Eternal uh wisdom and truths and
varities of the market will determine
what is funded what is not funded this
is I'm astonished how far this has gone
and how in a sense you can see it being
traced through in uh International
Psychiatry not necessarily in the mind
of those who promote International
Psychiatry the coun I'm against but it's
there all the same quick example of that
um there was I think she a sociologist
called v
schans um at the University of Bristol
she may have retired now she wrote a
wonderful piece in social science and
medicine few years ago about latia her
home
country how laia had fared with the fall
of the Iron Curtain and all this a
country that had become much more
insecure for most people uh when they
had lost the kind of social security
blankets which were available in the in
the Communist era and what he described
was the death of a category a Lo a folk
category in laia called Nery n
RV um a common stab obviously nervy was
a kind of condition that you could go to
the doctor about and it probably had
some various sort of Psychosocial
psychomedical features you know sleep
you know it has some physiological
features but nerdy embodied also a
complaint about things outside of the
space between is things in society
itself so that bringing Nery to the
doctor was a part of a complaint about
you know lack of jobs or poor housing or
whatever uh in the in the Communist
era so what happened to nvy this is what
happened International pharmaceutical
companies started to pay lapian
psychiatrists at to come to conference
to learn the diagnostic and statistical
manual definition of depression
yeah uh the book was trans DSM the
American you know classification system
was translated into Lan and the doctors
in a sense were taught about depression
which were they were then to teach to
their patients and prescribe the pills
and so she V skin studied this that
somehow a f category which embodied in
part a focus on objective external
social conditions in the society had
been expunged in favor of a category
which where it was assumed that what the
problem was lay between your ears only
and said nothing about society and what
you described was that looking at the
narratives that were generated by these
doctors and these patients you could see
the rise of an internalization of a
heightened sense of personal
responsibility for your position in life
your condition in life a heightened
sense of personal responsibility
reflecting the values of capitalist
Enterprise culture reflecting those
values in other words this was about
reshaping everyday social identity for
the average laan in the direction of um
a sort of politics free psychiatric
model not that of course the doctors who
were doing this were thinking about
neoliberal politics but this is how this
is how it
worked yeah uh so that to me is a kind
of abuse a kind of uh the kind of
globalization which um was perhaps was
not asked for by Lan people and
certainly one in which their social
problems which became in many cases much
more pressing after the the fall of the
Communist era for better or worse uh are
no longer reflected in the idioms of
distress so NY would be what we would
call an idiom of
distress um and it was being replaced by
depression which I think has become the
primary idian of distress in in the
western world evidence by the fact that
one person in one adult in seven in the
UK and in the US today is taking an
anti-depressant one is seven uh and not
just for a week like an antibiotic but
perhaps open-endedly so what is
that
um plus another example just quickly
before we move on to the meat of the
matter um I was a PhD exam of a
wonderful PhD which was looking at the
phenomenon of suicide suicidal farmers
in
India you might find this extraordinary
but in the last 25 years or so nearly a
quarter of a million small subsistent
farmers have committed suicide generally
using the insecticide provided by the
multinational
Monsanto which they repressed as part of
a package the Indian government
persuaded all whole cohort to far
hundreds of thousands of farmers more to
give out their traditional crops and to
make throw everything into genetically
mod mod ified cotton which meant they
had to buy the Seed from mon Santa they
had to buy the insecticide and the
fertilizer the seeds had to be
reproduced every year because they were
not self regenerating as the traditional
crops were and basically it didn't work
they were ruined and these Farmers not
knowing what to do when these huge debts
have been killing themselves with the
the loss of the
insecticide which um had they had had to
buy to uh supposedly keep the
genetically cotton plants going what was
the response of the Indian government to
this and indeed reported as such in the
in the laned without comment India needs
more
psychiatrists yeah so that's what I'm
talking
about uh in the same um PhD the men
recorded the the PHD candidate recorded
overhearing an old woman standing
outside a clinic a poor old woman in a
poverty stricken part of India um the
soal the soal community mental health
program they would send out a team of
psychiatrist in their cars from Urban
centers and they would tour these remote
tenic where they would use wet and
categories like depression or whatever
not local um Indian categories and
idioms and would prescribed medication
and she heard an old woman the PHD
overheard an poor old woman saying
outside the cleaning having just been in
I've got all these problems and now they
tell me I've got one more there's
something wrong with my
brain yeah so which brings us in you
know part into the kind of
dogmas that are pushed by like the
biological end of the western mental
health industry that there is something
wrong with the brains of people with
schizophrenia or or people with
depression only we can't quite pin down
what it is
yeah and if we're looking about the sort
of just as a a place to move off from
How Sound are the epistemological
foundations of
Psychiatry our generic AB our generic
category is something called a mental
disorder what is a mental
disorder uh the mind is is an immersion
property of brain but it is not an organ
how can the mind be disordered it's
disordered in the way that one could say
The British economy is disordered in
other words in a journalistic and
metaphoric way
so patri has skipped what is essentially
a philosophical problem not a scientific
problem what is a mental sorder by using
the approach used throughout history by
Alchemists you remember the medieval
Alchemists they were convinced that they
could get the right combination of Base
Metals lead tin copper and fuse them
together W what would be born would be
gold yeah that's how sari works it takes
a phenomenal loal approach it it clumps
together
categories uh they are not clumped
necessarily by Nature so much as in the
committee rooms of those people who are
revising each edition of the American
Psychiatric association or the World
Health equivalent which is called
ICD so it's very much a constructed
entity bypassing the problem so
this and it is it is an Exemplar Western
cultural product the way we think about
Metal reflects Western bical thinking
which we are now
exporting yeah so where we go it from
this what to me one of the seminal
Trends in Western Century Western uh
Western culture in the 20th century has
been the rise of medicalization of
everyday life and the demise of
constructions and uh Society figures to
whom previously preious people
previously turned like religious or some
kind of Faith or um going to the priest
or the old lady Over The Back Fence or
your local politician all these figures
have been in a sense demoted and what we
have risen is a secularized psychology
which is meant to capture all the the
spiritual and other ailments of
life
um Ivan ellich um the wonderful um B was
originally a Marxist sociologist was
writing about this uh in the 70s in a
book that is still undated still not
dated called medical Nemesis and I'll
come back that to a minute by definition
when you medicalize something if you
turn someone who is very very unhappy
because they live in an insecure housing
estate the children pass cocaine dealers
on the way to get to school it's unsafe
when you recast that as depression
something has happened to the social and
political roots of the problem that's it
yeah doesn't mean they're completely
incompatible but something has moved
rather like in the latian case from open
Society composed of individuals but
connections between individuals has
moved into the space between the two
ears of one
individual yeah so we have in Britain
the Royal colleges of general practice
and the Royal colleges of
Psychiatry who who do not contest the
general term given about that one in
four people in say in Britain or the us
or any or lvia or in Spain one in four
people at any one time are likely to
have a mental disorder be developing one
this to me is the most one of the most
extraordin bizarre statements that could
be possibly made if one in four members
of our society
were mentally disordered worthy of the
name how could Society run how could it
run how could buses run and Parliament
and pubs nothing would run it would
gradually break down um but the
medicalization of the world is a deep is
a deep deep uh Trend we see now the
growth of the size of psychology and
Psychiatry how many people at any one
time are practicing how many are are uh
submitting themselves to it as patients
and it is like Global mental health
itself I'll move on to reflect
when one com to think about it a NE Lial
philosophy yeah that society and
politics and
history uh you know background politics
History collectivities Society culture
have no charge have no purchase in the
neoliberal
world the
who which in many ways a very strange
organization too much funded by the drug
industry the who in conjunction with the
Lance at the famous journal in
2007 when the sort of global mental
health field was more or less formally
lodged made three statements core
statements which
captured uh what they felt was the need
for a global mental health
view um and I feel there's an abuse in
this just in this the first one was that
there are substantial numbers of mental
disorders in the world though largely
hidden largely hidden from the people
who supposed to be carrying them is what
what I say number one number two this is
the who that any one time one person in
three in the world is developing uring a
mental disorder one in
three I remember a fan of mine Professor
David engelby in in um the Netherlands
saying to me at the time if someone
believes that one person in three in the
of the whole global population let's
just even say adults is developing a
mental disorder they must be living on
another planet or I am yeah and the
third one was because of this huge scale
of untreated disease disease not
defined uh there was a case to scale up
Mental Health Service that means by
scaling up means selling the products of
the western mental health system to the
rest of the world selling them as it
were globalizing and
selling
um and that's what has happened going
back to Ivan illich then writing in the
70s who was a big critic of the power of
the international Health Lobby uh and
the International Medical establishment
remark me enough in fact the first line
of the book much quoted is the
International Medical establishment is
the number one threat to Health in the
world
yeah uh he talked about cultural yog
Genesis which
was which reflected the sense and I
think it's been similar in the 20th
century that social assumptions about
how tough the average citizen is how
resilient how much endurance the average
citizen can carry and still keep his or
her shape has changed through the 20th
century from an assumption in fact as
recently as the 60 from an assumption of
the average person and the average child
was basically resilient and though they
be may be knocked off some awful
tragedy um they will get over
it um that was before the age of
psychologist Waring over
disasters um and the role they had for
example in the Bosnian War I was a big
critic of the psychologization of the
Bosnian War which uh had um EU and uh
UNICEF psychology claiming that there
were three million uh bostonians who
needed urgent treatment for their
post-traumatic stress disorder
Preposterous stuff um illich argued that
the more we think of the average citizen
as being vulnerable defined by
vulnerability rather than by resilience
the more we inducing what he called a
kind of erogenesis we are seeing
ourselves as weaker and we'll become
weaker we'll become weaker it'll be
assumed we can't cope as we once thought
we
could and with the world you think of
the world what we're facing the next 30
40 years you know we really do need to
stay tough we you know we can't have a
discourse around uh emotions or
physiological changes uh that may signal
emotional
distress he warned about what happens to
the the identity of the average citizen
in in a process where uh life is
increasingly medicalized people there
more psychologist more counseling uh
more psychiatrists more
medication um and all of that
interesting enough this process that I
was describing in 20th century and and
illage 2 uh was nicely brought to ahead
by the then Archbishop of
Canterbury the number one one person in
the church the worldwide Church of
England um in the late
1990s he made a speech in which he said
you know sad now in the past when people
were going through some terrible period
in their life some crisis they would
turn to the church the church gave
pastoral care they would come and speak
to the priest he said now they don't do
that anymore they just go to
counselors so he's reflecting that same
he's reflecting that same process yeah
what we got to remember about the whole
discourse of the mental health industry
is that once opinion formers and and
leaders academic leaders whatever once
they declare something to be real it
becomes real in its consequences yeah it
becomes real in its consequences if we
are saying that one in four of of a
normal population not even in Wartime is
is about to have or risk or has a mental
disorder uh and they are supposedly
coming from figes of authority in the
universities and uh and practitioners of
stature then the consequences of that
declaration become very very
real we can see that one in seven on
anti-depressants yeah
so that leads me then
to our globalizing of the medicalization
of everyday life as a as a initially as
a western cultural Trend over the last
decades interesting enough I would Mark
the change to a view that we're we're
vulnerable not resistant and not
resilient to as late as the
60s in the 60s there the probably the
most famous peace time disas in this
country
was um
was uh in a village called abaan in
October
1966 um a disused massive Cal tip slag
you know of this of of of discarded coal
slag waste which had been accumulating
above the village for 200 years or so
the whole thing loosened by rain slipped
into The Village at school time and
swallowed the school and swallowed 130
children and 28
teachers that was a disaster what is
interesting is to see how unsch for
better words how un psychologized that
was a disaster of course it was all over
the newspapers there were regular
accounts about how the local people
weren't asking for National Aid they and
the neighboring Villages were showing
their toughness and resilience and they
were going to cope and manage this
crisis there was no psychologizing of it
there was no psychologist coming along
saying oh the surviving kids will have
PTSD forever or for a long time post
medic stress Etc which is what would
happen today and which I witnessed in uh
when I was working for Oxfam in
Bosnia um I persuaded Oxfam not to go
down the counseling route not to
psychologize the Bosnian War
uh and to put their monies into what the
survivors and victims there for example
in a Muslim town called TLA which was
besieged what did they want not what we
wanted for them and they did not want
counseling Etc so oxam heed but just to
say the problem about taking um a
western version of mental health of
course is evolving even in the west a
western version of Psychiatry Western
categories of psychiatry the problem
that taking that abroad is that
immediately if you stting to do research
you you are confronted by the problem of
validity scientific validity validity in
methodological research involving
people and when you're not studying
their kidneys which unlike the mind is
an organ you can grip yeah you can get a
grip on it we're good at that yeah but
validity means that the valid valid
research means that the questions you
ask do not confront the nature of
reality that those people are carrying
in their own
lives so you know I was recently doing
some stuff in Cambodia and I was
interested to see that um
anti-depressants were being sold often
one by one in Cambodian supermarkets and
that the local doctors were beginning to
recognize this word depression which has
previously had no place or exact
equivalent in the Cambodian in the the
Lexicon of the Cambodian language
K I would say virtually virtually
all research done by white Western
researchers on non-western subjects in
Psychology and Psychiatry and War
studies published in the high impact
journals I'm mostly only familiar with
the ones in English I would say
virtually all of them are
invalid because they have brought
methodologies which they have arrived
from with the West that owe nothing to
the local life world's understandings of
everything um of what adversity means of
local peoples they are invalid they are
non-h humanistic they are useless
useless the global mental health will
operates if medical anthropology or any
anthropology has never been discovered
they never cite texts in anthropology
never
um so the Assumption so here's an abuse
this is It's a built-in abuse that
Western knowledge it's an
epistemological abuse that Western
knowledge is universal even in things
like Mental Health Western knowledge is
universal um local knowledge is only
local yeah so in Zimbabwe where I've
just got back there is of course and
always has been a thriving
traditional uh traditional practice
through faith healers if you like Witch
Doctors traditional healers all of those
sort of people yeah which ostensibly
would be swept aside by the global
mental health
Juggernaut um and so to consider Western
knowledge Universal and local knowledge
local is to exemplify imperialism yeah
this is
imperialism as a I grew up in white
rodesia in the at the end of the
colonial period and it was clear that
local people were invited to invalidate
their own sense of the world and to take
on the sense of the world they saw in
the eyes of the white men who were their
colonizers that that was first class
knowledge then their knowledge was local
and second class and this is what Edward
side's definition of imperialism is
isn't it that imperialism presents
itself as an educational movement
setting out to modernize develop
instruct regulate and
civilize that's what the global mental
health movement in effect are doing and
that uh to me is an abuse if you like an
it's an a political abuse because only
the Western order has the power to
globalize itself you I Som say to people
well you know gosh we we love sending
out uh you know Global mental health
teams and councils all over the world
how would we feel if um after some
disaster in Britain or maybe after a
bomb or something six traditional
Cambodian healers who are called
k k crew crew arrived at at uh gatri
airport and they've come to heal our
trauma of the victims of the bomb
explosions and they brought their own
methodologies haven't they they brought
their Karma charts you know um and their
readings of the spirits uh which they
propose to use on us because that's what
they
use what I say to me what would you feel
about that what would you feel about
that people say well I think who what
who the hell do they think they are yeah
what do they know about us but the other
way around is another matter it seems we
know best
so um I've written quite a lot um they
very antagonistic or Globe mental health
um and it's interesting to see who comes
back at you Byron good um a famous
medical Anthropologist who particularly
made his name in studies in Iran and
who's at
Harvard um he wrote uh back to me and
put in a book also that my kind of
critique was almost unethical so here we
going from I'm critiquing abuse and he
finds that critique itself unethical
because my arguments would persuade
mental health programs going out to
these countries which he feels they need
he the
anthropology so I don't know why this
that turn at Harvard but there's there's
one thing I mean to imagine that um a
global Psychiatry which means a western
cultural product
Psychiatry can capture people anywhere
however colorful their cultural garments
is a sort of reductive caricature isn't
it it's an intellectual embarrassment
apart from anything else the idea that
there's some Universal biocyc social man
biocyc bios psychiatric man there is no
such
person um obviously people can go mad
around the world in various sorts of
ways for whatever it
means um but they those madnesses are
not all the same there is no one
schizophrenia um for example a category
that's hugely overused in
um in Zimbabwe um I'm speaking at a
seminar reviewing the famous wh studies
of of schizophrenia at the at an
Institute in Berlin next summer which
sounds very very interesting you know as
you know the who did a series of studies
of schizophrenia and developed countries
So-Cal schizophr developed countries and
non-developed countries Western Country
nonwestern countries like Nigeria was
one of them and to their sh using a
common standard methodology assuming
there's only one thing called SK you can
find you can elicit with the same
methodology anywhere in the world and
they found for their Shag
that if there was one one dep one
schizophrenia in the world then somehow
it seemed to do better in Nigeria or
South Africa than it did in Denmark or
the US which was embarrassing and which
they went to some trouble to to to take
the sting out of the problem was the
problem they made at the outset they
assumed there was one disease a un
schizophrenia that way of going mad and
that one methodology would capture it
and they went around the the world and
they found well funny I mean how come
they better in Nigeria they only got two
SAR in the whole country there must be
some mistake yeah so uh the problem was
there are many schizophrenias if you
want to use that term you know Madness
in Zimbabwe in many ways has um a whole
different set of attributes uh and you
know assumptions of Origins from other
parts of the world so the abuse I'm
talking about here is the assump that
the world can be fitted into Western
categories and already running Western
systems and here we're talking about um
the psychiatric system yeah I think uh
for me uh not just Psychiatry and
psychology in the Western in in the
nonwestern world P psychology I feel are
bloated categories and occupying too
much of culture even in the west they're
operating far beyond their uh
explanatory models um the results they
get are are anod to say the very least I
you might say it's remarkable we've had
antipsychotics being given to soal
schizophrenics since well schizophrenics
I'm not denying the C I'm not denying
the reality of of Madness since the 50s
so we've had two generations of um
people getting anti psychotics which is
supposed to be specific for
schizophrenia and so what are the
fortunes today of people who are
carrying the label schizophrenia
compared to the 50s they are much the
same schizophrenics are on the whole are
not closer to mainstream Society than
they ever were they are not or more
likely to be in Parliament than they
used to be or working in the pub or you
know your accountant they are not um as
a social
group uh they remain excluded
stigmatized whatever
disadvantaged just as much despite 50
years of drug treatment so is that a
success is that a success um right I'm
going to stop at a moment um what's the
time
22 just to recap I'm interested in
connecting the rise of neoliberal
philosophy which you can see not of
course in medicine you see it in all
aspects of social um of the social world
the way we look at social problems the
way we look at unemployed people and
poor people in Britain and elsewhere
yeah I'm collecting the rise of that the
idea that people uh can do if they do as
well as they like they are worthy of it
and they don't they're useless I'm
connecting that in an implicit way to
the rise of the medicalization of
everyday life which shifts the moral
economy as I described in relation to
ltia that somehow now people feel they
are more responsible for themselves um
as not you know and that somehow the
shape of their thinking has to fit into
the values of the of the um capitalist
Enterprise
culture and I'm picking it to that and
to the the globalization of our
medicalizing of everything um with the
assumption that Western knowledge is
First Rate and Universal and non-western
knowledge is is second rate and
local um and the distortions that this
throws up in both in on the field in in
in in projects out in these in in the in
Africa and elsewhere and in the
literature and I'm suggesting that a
great deal of the psychatric literature
which involves studying non-western
peoples is worthless and should be
thrown out of the
window so at that point I will stop for
the
moment are you
there thank you so much l yes um sorry
did did we did we lose transmission
there or
not now that I am aware I everything my
screen went blank okay fine fine that's
wonderful
okay I'll stop I'll stop we start with
the
questions
anybody wants to to jump
in looks like there's 15 people
here yes they have been joining in in
between thank you so much it's really
interesting and if there is nobody
asking anything I would like to know in
Zimbabwe what is the concept of
Madness just to have an idea of cont
just one second just one second
sorry
hello sorry enri there was a some just
asked the front door right can sorry can
you repeat your question something about
Madness in Zimbabwe yeah it is only to
have a a different perspective on the
issues at hand what they consider crazy
or whatever the concept they they use
and what they they acknowledge as switch
well uh well throughout Africa actually
clearly Madness can exist anywhere by
Madness we can call a psychosis we like
people who've taken leave of their
senses in Africa there are three
criteria uh that commun studies show
that points to people who might be
considered mad three categories one
people who are not intelligible that is
to say people who they don't seem be
making sense suddenly number two
unpredictable they suddenly start doing
things which you know stripping off
their clothes or just walking blankly
down the road which uh weren't predicted
are not normal and the third is neglect
of the social roles that should normally
be performing those three things give
you an outline of psychosis yeah um
obviously uh some aspects of psychosis
you might find everywhere in the world
um like some people can have deluded
ideas crazy ideas um that the the other
category that the other symptom that is
considered Cardinal to most for most
people for schizophrenia is of course
hearing voices voices coming from
outside the way my voice is coming into
your ears from outside the trouble is in
Africa uh hearing voices is an idiom of
distress um
and I saw a lot of African um patients
largely women with HIV in my NHS job um
for 16 years uh very distressed in
London and all with all sorts of
problems plus HIV and children with HIV
uh threatened with deportation back to
countries in Africa which didn't have
HIV medication therefore to die um and
quite a number of them heard voices as
they were assisted socially um and their
situation strengthened a bit and the
risk of deportation lessened the voices
faded yeah they were in ID of distress
they were not a symptom of psychosis of
course some people obviously May well be
mad and hearing voices but uh majority
were not and that's what one finds in
the Bible just to say the white man came
and he only left in 1980 in Zimbabwe and
he left his systems behind including
Psychiatry so I conduct clinical
seminars with fourth year medical
students Abby medical students in a
place called ineni which is the one of
the largest asylums in southern Africa I
think built in the colonial era and
there you see some of the consequences
of uh the word first of the white man
sarry which the white man left behind
that uh the the category schizophrenia
which is is stigmatized in Zab as it is
over here is hugely overused for all
sorts of problems just used it is used
followed if they have it by putting
people on antipsychotic medication which
they must then go and buy this is in a
country with no economy and so there is
a social institution labeled
schizophrenia which arose from the
colonial era most of those people should
not have been given the diagnosis anyway
they may have had some transient thing
you know schizophrenia implies
chronicity um and but they are lumbered
now with this category which can't
easily be scraped off them they're
supposed to take all this medication no
one expects them to work again and once
created a huge pool of if you like
institutionalized or non-
institutionalized um I mean in or out of
the hospital psychiatric patients um
because of assuming that they must fit
into the white man's textbooks yeah now
these people I think some of these
people are definitely Disturbed uh they
are having I think culture they having
stressed reactions which are culturally
framed in many ways all that is dumped
um it took me only in my second year out
there did I realize that the medical
students when they presented to me past
medical history having clarked the
patients never presented anything about
whether the patient ever gone to see a
traditional healer or anything why
because they had picked up without
anyone telling them that talking about
indigenous beliefs was not part of
modernity and learning to be a western
doctor is definitely a you know a
modernist exercise and so they just left
it out until I told them to and then
that that so under dur from me they
started to take a fuller history and of
course a much richer story emerged much
richer
yeah
um here's a test f here's a question for
you PR all so he was from martinque the
colored man but a French citizen he did
medicine and then he trained in
Psychiatry and he went to work in
Algeria which was then a colonial
possession as you
know there were two groups of
psychiatrist working there one were
French I.E they had grown up in
Metropolitan France qualified in
Metropolitan France and had gone out to
the Colony Algeria to work the others
were
algerians of course French French
speaking but algerians had go up to
Algeria and done mitt in Algeria and
were working there psychiatrist he asked
them he he separated them into two
groups and asked them the same question
and this is the question I bring to my
medical students just a few weeks
ago um he asked the two groups what do
you think of traditional healers and
Faith healers and traditional birth
assistants and Bone Setters and wise old
women you know that stuff indigenous
knowledge indigenous attitudes to
adversity what do you think of it the AR
both
groups um well both groups he reported
that both groups were extraordin
negative they were very negative and
dismissive of traditional healing and
all that sort of thing but one group was
much more dismissive than the other
which was it so I told the story to my
medical student Zimbabwe a few weeks ago
say who do you think were the most
dismissive of native practice in that
the French doctors or the Algerian
doctors well they are all too young to
remember the colonial era but they know
the Dynamics of it and the whole class
says oh of course the French doctors
wrong he was the Algerian doctors panon
reported the Algerian doctors seemed to
have to to more to prove to show they
were fit to turn the key of of the in
the lock of modernity as you put it yeah
they felt they had to much more
vigorously dump local stuff to show that
they were the equivalent to Metropolitan
France so so this is uh these are the
issues h
um I would think you know Western
knowledge and Western system Western
understandings of a person are like a
tide that is swept over the
world
um
and in so doing they have squashed out a
whole range of diversities and attitudes
to to care and society and all of that
which I think amount to an
abuse that's
all
thank
you ER please anybody that wants to ask
go
ahead hi um hello tar hello um I guess
um when I think about just this meeting
even
I I just wonder how do we contend with
the problem that people who work in
Psych
researchers clinicians and so on in the
west are not even educated at the most
basic level on any of the like liberal
Concepts that you're discussing and that
we're all discussing there's a total
shift away from the literally studying
history art exposure to Art
literature um
philosophy you know Le um political
education just seems to direct people
into the legal profession or into
politics and it's all totally a
historical um yeah it's like all about
stem you know science
technology and everything else is just
totally undermined and unappreciated
like from from
kindergarten sure um I share your
pessimistic view of course it's hardly
restricted to the health scientist if UK
at the moment we have a government that
have made it clear that they want to
defund or at least diminish courses at
University which are like soft Arts
which don't lead to jobs necessarily and
that the measure of the worth of
university courses is What proportion of
their graduates are in full-time work
within two years that kind of so we are
in an age of philistinism yeah
but
so it's running right across you know to
me it's running right across the polity
um you could say many respects when you
come back to the Health Sciences that
what we witness is the triumphalism of
the idea of the technical mind you know
the technical mind has made the
spectacular advances in the world since
1650 um it's hard for us not to think
that investigating the Mind might be a
bit like you know the first Bridge
Builders we think like that we I think
that it's all fundamentally a Mis Noma
that we can investigate
mind mind this virtual space uh using
the techniques that we apply to Physical
Medicine the body which assume a pathway
or Pathways which lead to
destinations as far as I'm concerned
there's no destination in mind it's a
nonsense the mind is as philosopical
space you know there isn't a destination
to get at it uh obviously it all comes
from brain in the end but as you know
everyday Psychiatry and psychology
operates very little in the realm of
Physical
Medicine um when I was in the H field of
course I would see people with HIV
dementias or HIV brain infections now
those were definitely diseases those are
diseases I tell my students but
depression schizophrenia all that which
where we can find no reproduceable
biological changes in the brain those
are merely syndromes those are
phenomological GA phological
Constellations constellated by
psychiatrist in rooms not by Nature so
um but these you see you see the you can
see the same pressures operating in
education system you know neoliberal
thinking has in fused the whole of
society in many ways um we've become
less interested in socialist ideas in
collectivities you know trade unions are
weaker and Healthcare and certainly
psychiat and psychology which are
quintessentially cultural products have
followed down the same path but I share
your pessimism
Tamar
hello
hello yeah thank you again
oh sorry I don't know what the silence
means because I can't see
anyone that's right on my is waiting for
somebody else to to jump with the next
question and if not I'm going to ask
myself what would you do if you were to
have any say in the education system to
correct
this education you mean medical
education I I I would say Society wide
but yeah go go for the medical as well
go why the wider question is is
difficult the med I I think um we need
to training in uh in medicine and
specifically of course in the cardio
psychology needs to pay far more
attention to the output of medical
anthropologists yeah uh medical
anthropologists
um deal with collectivities with
background value you know that would be
the first thing um and the
deconstruction of the power of Western
knowledge that it can globalize itself
but should
it uh you know much more honesty of that
kind plus more honesty uh with about
really how little how few breakthroughs
have ever been made in
Psychiatry yeah functional
Psychiatry I'm distinction here between
organic pchar which is a psch of
physical illness like a you know a chest
infection causing a confusional state a
delirium and functional Psychiatry which
is what most psychi is operating in
which is the Psychiatry of syndromes
which we cobbled together depression you
know
bipolar post-traumatic stress disorder
schizophrenia all of those of syndromes
doesn't mean they're not real issues
there for the for the people who are
carrying those problems howsoever named
of course I'm I'm not playing that down
um but
um it's been submitted to a quite you
know a quite a rigid ideology which
insists that the problems are
essentially
technical